<pre>
  BIP: 123
  Title: BIP Classification
  Author: Eric Lombrozo <elombrozo@gmail.com>
  Comments-Summary: No comments yet.
  Status: Active
  Dash-Status: Active
  Type: Process
  Created: 2015-08-26
  License: CC0-1.0
           GNU-All-Permissive
</pre>

==Abstract==

This document describes a classification scheme for BIPs.

BIPs are classified by system layers with lower numbered layers involving more intricate interoperability requirements.

The specification defines the layers and sets forth specific criteria for deciding to which layer a particular standards BIP belongs.

==Copyright==

This BIP is dual-licensed under the Creative Commons CC0 1.0 Universal and GNU All-Permissive licenses.

==Motivation==

Dash is a system involving a number of different standards. Some standards are absolute requirements for interoperability while others can be considered optional, giving implementors a choice of whether to support them.

In order to have a BIP process which more closely reflects the interoperability requirements, it is necessary to categorize BIPs accordingly. Lower layers present considerably greater challenges in getting standards accepted and deployed.

==Specification==

Standards BIPs are placed in one of four layers:

# Consensus
# Peer Services
# API/RPC
# Applications

Non-standards BIPs may be placed in these layers, or none at all.

===1. Consensus Layer===

The consensus layer defines cryptographic commitment structures. Its purpose is ensuring that anyone can locally evaluate whether a particular state and history is valid, providing settlement guarantees, and assuring eventual convergence.

The consensus layer is not concerned with how messages are propagated on a network.

Disagreements over the consensus layer can result in network partitioning, or forks, where different nodes might end up accepting different incompatible histories. We further subdivide consensus layer changes into soft forks and hard forks.

====Soft Forks====

In a soft fork, some structures that were valid under the old rules are no longer valid under the new rules. Structures that were invalid under the old rules continue to be invalid under the new rules.

====Hard Forks====

In a hard fork, structures that were invalid under the old rules become valid under the new rules.

===2. Peer Services Layer===

The peer services layer specifies how nodes find each other and propagate messages.

Only a subset of all specified peer services are required for basic node interoperability. Nodes can support further optional extensions.

It is always possible to add new services without breaking compatibility with existing services, then gradually deprecate older services. In this manner, the entire network can be upgraded without serious risks of service disruption.

===3. API/RPC Layer===

The API/RPC layer specifies higher level calls accessible to applications. Support for these BIPs is not required for basic network interoperability but might be expected by some client applications.

There's room at this layer to allow for competing standards without breaking basic network interoperability.

===4. Applications Layer===

The applications layer specifies high level structures, abstractions, and conventions that allow different applications to support similar features and share data. 

==Classification of existing BIPs (example)==

{| class="wikitable sortable" style="width: auto; text-align: center; font-size: smaller; table-layout: fixed;"
!Number
!Layer
!Title
!Owner
!Type
!Status
|- style="background-color: #cfffcf"
| [[bip-0001.mediawiki|1]]
|
| BIP Purpose and Guidelines
| Amir Taaki
| Process
| Active
|-
| [[bip-0010.mediawiki|10]]
| Applications
| Multi-Sig Transaction Distribution
| Alan Reiner
| Informational
| Withdrawn
|- style="background-color: #cfffcf"
| [[bip-0012.mediawiki|12]]
| Consensus (soft fork)
| OP_EVAL
| Gavin Andresen
| Standard
| Withdrawn
|- style="background-color: #cfffcf"
| [[bip-0014.mediawiki|14]]
| Peer Services
| Protocol Version and User Agent
| Amir Taaki, Patrick Strateman
| Standard
| Final
|-
| [[bip-0022.mediawiki|22]]
| API/RPC
| getblocktemplate - Fundamentals
| Luke Dashjr
| Standard
| Final
|- style="background-color: #cfffcf"
| [[bip-0101.mediawiki|101]]
| Consensus (hard fork)
| Increase maximum block size
| Gavin Andresen
| Standard
| Withdrawn
|-
|}

==Dash Modifications==
* None
